the UN Security Council will meet next
week to follow up on the UN top courts
ruling on Gaza the international court
of justice on Friday ordered Israel to
do everything in its power to prevent
genocide in the territory the
preliminary ruling in a case brought by
sou Africa told Israel to do more to
protect civilians but stopped short of
calling for a ceasefire in Israel's
military campaign against Hamas the
court also ordered the release of
Israeli hostages kidnapped by Hamas
during the October seventh Terror
attacks outside the international court
of justice Palestinian supporters watch
a live stream of proceedings in light of
the foro some here had been hoping for
more from the
judges but many are seeing this ruling
as a symbolic Victory with the
Palestinian delegation at the icj saying
it could have far-reaching
consequences it is an important step
towards Justice to the Palestinian
people we're not here for vengeance
we're here for justice and we seek
Justice for our people we seek Justice
for the children who were killed in Gaza
and all of Palestine on the Israeli side
these campaigners can't believe the
genocide case brought before the court
by South Africa is even
proceeding the uh very solid evidence
that was presented by the Israeli side
two weeks ago
where it was very clearly stated that
Israel cannot commit genocide because
what is being done there doesn't have
the intention to commit a genocide this
is not
genocide Israel had been pushing for the
icj to drop the case completely and
after the ruling its prime minister gave
this
reaction the charge of genocide leveled
against Israel is not only false is
outrageous and decent people everywhere
should reject it while the icj stopped
short of calling for ceasefire South
Africa's president is urging for more to
be done to stop the fighting in
Gaza in which they voiced alarm over we
firmly believe that following this
judgment there should now be a more
considered effort towards a
ceasefire and negotiations should
commence on a permanent two-state
solution
for enabling Israel and Palestine to
live side by side as independent states
discernably now Israel has been asked to
report back within a month on how it's
upholding the orders from the top un
Court although the court does not have
the power to enforce the
ruling
let's get more on this from DW special
correspondent a Ibrahim who joins us
from Jerusalem hello a tell us more
about how people in Israel are reacting
to this
ruling I think there's a sense of relief
that the court did stop short of
ordering a complete cessation of
hostilities or a a ceasefire I think
it's important to to remember that for a
large overwhelming part of Israeli
Society they're still sort of stuck on
October 7th that trauma of that day is
not over yet uh there are still hostages
held in Gaza just yesterday Hamas
released another video of uh hostages uh
apparently showing them still alive and
that's the kind of retraumatization that
people here uh uh go through and so
there's still a sense that the war in
Gaza is a war of self-defense for people
here and there was a general sense of
confusion and shock at this whole case
because people here feel they're on a
self-defensive war while at the same
time on the global stage we have seen
over the past three months a growing
isolation of the Israeli position and
the position of Israel's allies like the
US and Germany Visa V uh this war so
there is a sense of relief that a
ceasefire has not uh been ordered at the
same time uh at least for Palestinian uh
officials and Palestinians um there's
still win in this uh ruling the fact
that the court has said that there's a
that the the genocide is is plausible of
course the ruling whether or not there
is a genocide happening will take years
but the fact that it has said that it is
plausible and now Israel is uh will have
to face that accusation in court U seen
as a win for uh
Palestinians uh and their allies they're
also um there's there also analysts who
say while the court has not uh ordered a
complete ceasefire some of the
provisional measures that have been
ordered including the prevention of
genocide the allowing of more
humanitarian Aid would uh require de
facto some sort of uh toning down of the
fighting or something close to uh a
ceasefire so certainly as you mentioned
at the top a polarizing uh decision but
for people here in Israel a sense of of
relief as they continue to live the
trauma of October 7th right uh the UN
Secretary General Antonio guia says he
trusts Israel will comply with the icj's
order now considering that Netanyahu has
so far resisted International pressure
is this ruling likely to change how
Israel conducts this
war well what Israel says and what we've
heard government spokespeople say uh
ever since this ruling was issued uh uh
uh on uh uh Friday is that Israel is
already doing its best that's what they
say to uh prevent civilian uh uh
casualties that Israel uh employs
according to these government
spokespeople measures to make sure that
civilians are kept out of Harm's Way and
we've heard one government spokesperson
say that there's actually excess
capacity for the processing of Aid into
uh uh Gaza now that is a completely
different picture from what we hear
civilians on the ground reporting uh
what we hear from International
organizations as well so there's
definitely an attempt by the Israeli
site to frame this as well we've already
been doing this but that is something
that certainly uh large you know
credible human rights organizations
disagree with I mean we're looking at a
death toll that has surpassed 20,000
according to uh the health Ministry in
the Hamas run strip and uh casualties
that uh that you know far exceed uh that
number in a span of more than three
months right PW special correspondent AI
Ibrahim from Jerusalem thank
you let's get the perspective from Gaza
with journalist ham baloa who spent the
first months of the war reporting from
inside The embattled Enclave he joins us
now from the Jordanian Capital am man
hello Hasam the court has ordered Israel
to prevent acts of genocide in Gaza but
not to end its military operation there
can this ruling really be considered a
victory for the people in
Gaza uh two levels we are talking about
the official level um human rights
organizations yeah where they consider
it as a as a win uh accepting the case
of
genociding um against Palestinian people
um U most of the Palestinian officials
mentioned this and they said this is a
victory and a win uh it's a a great and
a symbolic step um that the icj
accepting such case against Israel for
the first time but on the ground level
with the people they are disappointed
they think this is not going to change
the reality of their life the current um
uh suffer and uh displacement lack of uh
all uh basic needs um um I talked to a
few people in Gaza and they said said
that um the death and the killing will
continue the operation is continued so
this ruling is not going to change our
reality also on the ruling the court
called on Palestinian militant groups
such as Hamas to release the remaining
hostages How likely is that to
happen it's not going to happen without
a deal Hamas is it clear about this
Hamas uh uh despite they welcome the the
ruling and they said that the the um
they need International Community to
impress Israel to implement um um a
seized fire in in in Gaza they they they
ask for um a swap deal um Hamas one of
the aims that they announced earlier
when they did um the attack of October 7
that to release the Palestinian
prisoners held in the Israeli prisons uh
so they um no nobody is talking about
Hamas freeing the Israeli hostages
without exchanging them with the with
the Palestinian prisoners in the Israeli
prison uh you started talking about it
earlier in your first uh response uh
there's no ceasefire on the table for
now the wh World Health Organization is
now warning that the last functioning
Hospital in Gaza is on the brink of
collapse what does that mean for the
humanitarian situation on the ground
there Gaza now is is suffering from
different levels of um uh uh um uh
problems and and and um horrific
situation and U Food level on the
medical level um uh um Sheltering um the
most essential and one of the basics
that the the hospitals most of them they
are run out of service uh the main two
hospitals in Gaza Strip the one in Gaza
City which is cha hospital and and and
and was run out of of of service um a
long time ago now partially working the
the other one in kanun Naser Hospital
which is surrounded by the tanks and a
lot of footage and reports coming from
there they are suffering lack of or
shortage of um U uh of Medics um
existing there their capacity is very
limited so and on all levels like like
the medical and the health system is is
about to colls yes journalist ham Bala
thank
you thank
you our correspondent Diane Hawker is in
Johannesburg South Africa hello Diane
South Africa took the case to the court
in the first place how is the ruling
being perceived in the
country well Eddie in South Africa there
is a lot of positivity around this
decision many South Africans have been
posting on social media and in community
groups posting South African flags and
images of our former president Nelson
Mandela um you'll know that Nelson
Mandela was someone who really was in
support of the Palestinian cause and he
said um that South Africa would not be
free unless the people of Palestine were
free and people will have a feeling that
this decision and uh the South African
government's move is taking that
position forward Ward and in a way
upholding what Nelson Mandela had fought
for of course there's also an
understanding here that the decision um
by the icj does play South Africa to
somewhat in conflict with um some other
International Players uh particularly
with the Israeli government who are not
happy with the outcome um just a few
hours after the decision was was
announced um the is the Israeli carrier
L all announced that it would be halting
flights to South Africa um in March and
this is the the airline said this was as
a result of fewer Israelis wanting to
travel to South Africa of course here
locally um this decision has also given
more momentum to protests that have been
going on in support of the Palestinian
people we've seen pickets and also um
some uh uh protests against particular
companies which are believed to be
supporting um the Israeli
cause the genocide trial will continue
and could take months or years what does
South Africa expect now from the
icj well in the short term South
Africa's expectations don't really look
towards the icj but they look more
towards the International Community as
the report that played earlier on
mentioned um there's there will be a
talks held at the uh un Security Council
uh and of course South Africa is hoping
that there will be action taken there
they're also hoping that other countries
now that the icj has made this ruling
will start to speak out and that there
will be a change in Israel's uh uh uh
the the behavior of Israeli leaders for
example one of the things mentioned in
the decision um relates to to to uh the
the government stopping any kind of
incitement and the the decision also
mentioned language that was used by um
Israeli leaders so the South African
government is really expecting and
hoping that there will be a change in
that language um and really a concerted
effort to preserve lives okay DW
correspondent Diane Hawker in
Johannesburg thank
you